once around the moons of Uranus.
So this is an image of the planet
Uranus, Uranus, Uranus, whatever you
want to call it, taken by Voyager 2 when
it flew past the planet out there in the
cold of the outer solar system on its
grand tour where it went past all the
giant planets and it's the only probe to
have done so. And sadly, the image is
rather boring. There's just a slight
hint of a a cloud feature right at the
bottom center of the image there.
Otherwise, it's just a pale green disc.
And when I look at it through a
telescope, that's exactly what I see. A
very small pale green disc.
We think internally that there is
probably a rocky metal core right in the
center, quite small. And then there is
an overlying layer of
ices, methane, water, and ammonia ices
filling quite a large section of the
interior of the planet overlaying by an
atmosphere containing hydrogen, helium,
and methane in the gas phase this time.
And then what we're actually seeing is
that outer cloud deck on the top
discovered of course by this man William
Hershel, maker of some of the finest
telescopes at the time. And the picture
there is his 40ft telescope. Sadly it's
no more. I think all that exists is that
the mirror is still present in the
science museum, but the rest of the
construction down near the west of
London uh was all dismantled and
destroyed.
The telescope he was using was this one.
And he was in his back garden at uh the
uh New King Street in Bath when he saw
somewhere near Zeta Tori what he thought
was a nebulous star or perhaps a comet.
Didn't look like a star. He was
observing with a power of 227 times
magnification which is a lot for a
telescope of this size. But he did make
exceptionally good optics and was
renowned for having uh some of the
highest power instruments.
He boosted that power all the way up to
460 times and then to 932 times nearly a
thousand times magnification. I would
never use such a thing these days. Um,
and what he really noticed was that the
object, whatever it might be, was
visibly larger at higher power. And that
really doesn't happen for stars. They
are pointlike so far away that you just
don't get any magnification that you can
detect by putting in higher power
eyepieces. So he wrote to the astronomer
royal and the royal society and uh
got a reply saying that uh other people
had got in on the act and started
looking at this object and they didn't
know what it was.
It says we don't know what to call it.
It's as likely to be a regular planet
moving in a circular path around the sun
rather than a comet in a very eccentric
orbit. And there certainly was no sign
of a visible tail or coma. So, uh, this
was the discovery of the first planet to
be observed um, other than since
antiquity with the main planets all the
way out to Saturn. And of course very
famously studying the orbit of Uranus
led to the the fact that it was not uh
making progress around the sky as
expected being pulled off course by the
next planet also to be discovered and
predicted as a result of mathematical
calculations and that of course was
Neptune. But the other thing about the
way that uh Uranus moves is that it is
tilted right over on its side. Uh the
Jupiter is almost at right angles, three
degrees of tilt only compared between
its spin axis and the axis of its orbit
around the sun. Saturn and Neptune 27
and 30°. The Earth 23 and a half. Uranus
is tipped right over at 98. Um so
spinning in a very crazy manner. This
would mean that some of the time you
would have one of the poles pointing at
the sun and half an orbit later the
other pole pointing at the sun and in
between the sun would rise and set
according to the rotation of the planet.
Uh but um the seasons must be completely
crazy.
Now the other thing that was confirmed
by Voyager was the presence of a set of
rings. It had been suspected that the
planet might have some rings because it
had moved in front of and occulted a
number of stars blocking the starlight.
And as it did so, the image of the stars
seem to have flick on and off a little
bit as in fact they were passing behind
the rings.
And that wasn't a categorical
proof, but uh finally Voyager 2 was able
to image the rings directly and reveal
that they were there. Um we now know
that Jupiter and Neptune also have
rings. So all of the giant planets do.
Now, here's a lovely photograph of the
Uranus system. You have the planet
overexposed in the center, then the
rings, and then marked out and labeled
quite a number of the moons. We know of
29 so far, and 27 have names. We can
split them into three groups. The 14
inner small dark moons that seem to be
associated with the rings. Then we have
the big five, which are
worlds in their own right. They are
spherical, ellipsoidal in hydrostatic
equilibrium. In other words, gravity has
overwhelmed the strength of the
materials, the rock and ice, and crushed
them into the most efficient shape
possible. And that's part of the way we
define dwarf planet if the object was
orbiting around the sun. But of course,
they're orbiting around the planet here.
So, we refer to them as moons.
And then we have 10 irregular moons
further out. Now you can see some of the
objects labeled here. We've got Puck,
Juliet, Porsche, some of the inner moons
there close to the rings. And then
brightly shining away we have Miranda,
Ariel, Umbreel, and Titania. And just
actually sneaking off the top of the
screen there is the missing one uh which
is Oberon.
So these began to be discovered just 6
years after Hershel had found the
planet. So January the 11th, 1787, he
found the first two, Titania and Oberon
on the same uh observing run. Later he
thought he'd found up to six moons in
total, and he even reported that he
thought there might be a ring. Now we
don't know if he was uh able to see the
rings or not. Um
so at this point two moons Tatania and
Oberon by 1840
telescopes were improving and also
Uranus was partway around its orbit and
higher up in the sky as observed from
the northern hemisphere and therefore
less obscured by the deletterious
effects of the atmosphere, the
atmospheric refraction and the
turbulence and dispersion and so on that
is caused. And so by 1851 we have
William Lassal who formally discovered
the next two aerial and Umbreal.
But then there was a gap took nearly a
hundred years from 1851 to 1948
before little Miranda shown at the left
of the big five there was discovered by
Gerald Kiper. he after whom the Kiper
belt beyond Neptune is named. And it's
not surprising because it is smaller and
uh much less bright. It's quite tricky
to observe. Even with a small amateur
telescope, you can easily see the other
four. Uh spotting Miranda bit more of a
challenge.
Now, these names are all from
Shakespeare or from Alexander Pope's
poem, The Rape of the Lock, suggested by
John Hershel, William Hershel's son. In
fact, Oberon and Titania are from
Shakespeare's Midsummer Night's Dream.
They're fairies.
Ariel is also in Shakespeare's Tempest
and in Pope's uh poem, The Rape of the
Lock, which is where Oberon, a gnome, is
found, as is Balina, one of the other
smaller moons that we've already seen on
the map. The rest are from Shakespeare,
and uh we have uh Miranda, which is in
the Tempest, and so on. So, they're all
typically named after various uh sprites
and uh airy types of uh um creatures
within those uh fictional plays.
Now, I said that Hershel had reported
the existence of up to six moons, but
they weren't these.
He reported two in 1790, giving orbits
for them. You can see there just under
six days and just under 11 days. So
interior to Titania and between Titania
and Oberon. And a second pair at 30 to8
days and further out exterior to Oberon
at 107 days, but nobody else could find
them for decades. Now this didn't rule
them out because Hershel was renowned
for being able to see things that others
could did not. Uh so they were widely
described and in the textbooks for many
years
and it turns out that when Lassal found
Ariel and Umbreel neither of those
matched any of the supposed four
reported by Hersel. So it seems that
they were speurious probably just
coincidental background stars. And it is
very easy to think you've spotted moons
of the outer planets which are in fact
just background stars. You need to
observe carefully over a significant
number of nights to notice that these
moons move in a predictable pattern
rather than just being background stars
in which they position changes as the
planet moves by.
Now in 1986 we had Voyager 2 fly by and
that led to the discovery not only of
those rings but also 10 more moons the
interior inner moons.
And then in 1999
uh astronomers studying the Voyager
photographs from that flyby found one
more peritor uh lurking that had not
been spotted. So with a total of 11
discovered that way
since that flyby with no other probes
having gone out this far to the ice
giant planets Uranus and Neptune um gone
anywhere near them. We have had to rely
on telescopes. But of course groundbased
telescopes and space telescopes have
been getting better and better. So in
1997,
the first groundbased telescopes were
able to detect some of the irregular
moons, Psychorax and Caliban. And
continued searches led to seven more,
two inner moons, Cupid and M, uh being
discovered using the Hubble Space
Telescope. And then in 2024, Scott
Shepard found another one uh which was
uh documented in 24. or the discovery
goes back to 23 and so it's given the
designation S23
uh 2023 U for Uranus one. Um and here's
a little map of the location of some of
those moons um that were found by the
Hubble Space Telescope there including
two more outer rings. So definitely a
complex ring system and you can see MAB
and Cupid are marked there.
In 2025 the latest one was added and
that is S for satellite 2025 for the
year U for Uranus number one. And you
can see the discovery image there with a
lot of the other inner moons and the
ring system and the planet itself and
the little circle around the newly
discovered moon. And that was done at
the Southwest Research Institute using
images from our new toy, the James Webb
Space Telescope. So, not only making
discoveries in the far distant universe,
but using its uh uh incredible
resolution to study uh the outer planets
and the moon systems.
So, that's a brief survey around what we
have found. Let's dive in a little bit
deeper.
These are the major five moons, the big
five. Ariel, Umbreel, Titania, Oberon,
and Miranda, with the largest being
Titania. Just under 1,600 kilometers in
diameter. Um, and you see the mass
there, 3.5 * 10 ^ 21 kg. Sounds like a
lot, but it's only a 20th of the mass of
our moon. though relatively small um in
comparison to the Earth's moon
all the way down to the smallest which
is Miranda just under 500 km and uh you
can see there that it's uh around uh
about 6.7 * 10 19 kg. So that's 2.5
magnitudes less than uh Titania making
it a tiny fraction. They're all pretty
dark in color. Don't reflect a huge
amount of the light that strikes them
with Umbreel being the darkest and Ariel
being the brightest. You can see that in
the photograph there. Ariel looking
quite shiny as the second one from the
left.
So, Tatania, this is the best image that
we have taken by Voyager 2 from half a
million kilometers away.
It wasn't possible to fly close to the
moons and still take the desired path
round Uranus that would deflect and
accelerate the space probe onto Neptune.
So, a compromise had to be made. We
wanted to get to Neptune. We had to take
a certain window through the
gravitational well, get a bit of a
acceleration, a gravitational slingshot,
and that meant not going very close to
some of Uranus's moons. So, we still
don't ha have superb images of them. And
this is why I say we should send another
probe to the system and get a lot more
uh information that way.
mixed surface, gray craters, very much
moonlike, some evidence of geological
activity perhaps, uh, but it's a little
hard to tell due to the lower
resolution.
The same is true for Oberon. It's
slightly smaller, 1500 km. And this
image was taken by Voyager 2 uh, from a
bit further away, 660,000
km. dark in color. Carbonrich material
seems to be scattered on the surface
perhaps from eruptions uh out of some of
the craters. So, we're not entirely sure
what's going on. Got a bit closer to
this one. Aerial, slightly smaller,
1,200 km in diameter
and uh a distance of 130,000 km. So,
much better resolution. And you can see
a lot going on on the surface. a lot of
these strange chasms and fault lines in
the crust suggesting cracking and
shrinkage perhaps um perhaps even some
fluid flow going on there so pointing to
something interesting
and then we have Umbriel also 1200 km
but again Voyager 2 did not get that
close a lot of craters very dark in
color a rather curious bright ring up at
the top of the image age, which is
actually possibly frosty material,
although it seems to be near the equator
rather than not. But this may be all
down to the very curious seasons that
you get on uh these moons as they orbit
around Uranus's equator, which is of
course at a crazy angle to its orbit and
the direction of the sun.
And then we have Miranda. Very nice
image of Miranda from nice and close up.
Uh, it's 470 kilometers in diameter,
just large enough to pull itself into a
sphere. And
there are some crazy features. There are
some really big chunks taken out of it.
A very big cliff that you can see right
at the bottom where there's almost a
piece missing out of the uh the round
disc and that bright chevron uh Vshape
in the center which is bright ice. And
Miranda is very different to the others.
There are some craters. There's all
sorts of grooves and slabs though, and
it looks like a complete jumble. So,
what do we think is going on? Well, the
big two,
Titania and Oberon, are very similar. We
think they are differentiated worlds
with a dry rocky inner core
and then an outer core that is hydrated
of wet mixture of rock and water
overlaying by a salty liquid ocean
topped by an ice crust and then the
dirty dusty outer covering on the top of
that ice. And you can see the ice is
exposed where recent impacts have uh
punched holes uh and created the
craters. So briney oceans down there
underneath fairly thick layers of ice
and kept warm because the cores are
warm. And that is all down to tidal
heating. We think that these moons have
been interacting with each other
gravitationally and with the gravity of
the giant planet putting themselves into
tidal lock ratios which that do seem to
evolve over time. And in the past we we
had we think if we run the simulations
backwards Miranda and Umbreal in a 3:1
ratio and Ariel and Titania in a 4:1
ratio and those would have pumped the
orbits into uh ellipses and with the
tidal effect of the giant planet caused
uh frictional heating within the
stretching into ellipsoids of the moons
as they came closer and further away
from the gravity field of the primary.
So, similar to what goes on with the
moons of Jupiter, that tidal heating in
the core, keeping the liquid water from
freezing out in the center of those big
two.
The second pair umbreal and aerial
also differentiated but we think that
the wet core is a single wet core rather
than there being a a dry central inner
core to it. But again a salty water
ocean. So all four with the ice crust
over a potential biosphere of liquid
water. And uh this doesn't get talked
about very much and it's why I think we
need to go and explore these four little
ice worlds orbiting around Uranus. Uh
all of which have this uh characteristic
protected ocean environment. Uh
protected from the cold of space and the
ravages of the solar wind and the
radiation from space and cosmic rays and
so on by all that ice could be perfect
environment in which life could evolve.
And so actually there are more of these
ice worlds with liquid water oceans at
Uranus than in the rest of the solar
system.
Miranda smaller and I would describe it
as a jumbled mess. We don't think
there's a liquid water ocean. It's uh
too small and has uh comprised a
completely chaotic mixture of ice and
rock. And this all points back to a
fairly recent giant impact event on
Miranda
disrupting it and then it reccreing and
not yet having redifferentiated.
It's too small for gravity to really be
able to do that quickly and so it will
probably eventually start to
differentiate, but it's a very slow
process at only 470 km in diameter. It's
half the diameter of even the asteroid
series.
So,
but it suggests that there might have
been this giant impact and that that
could have hurled a lot of material into
orbit around the system in general. And
maybe that was uh where some of the
material in Uranus's rings has come
from.
But all this begs the question about the
origin of the other major moons as well.
And we think they formed around the
planet
either coincident with the formation of
the planet itself. So co- accretion
or they accreted out of a debris ring
from a giant impact with the main planet
itself.
And that is quite plausible in that it
seems reasonable to think that Uranus
would have formed with its axis in a
normal orientation up and down uh north
and south so that it was rather like the
other planets and had more ordinary
seasons. But maybe some large object
smashed into it and tipped it over and
created the ring system at the same
time. and then some of the ring material
accreted to give us the moons. So they
would be younger than the uh planet
itself.
If we then look at the inner moons,
these are all very small little dark
worlds,
many of them. You can see the names
there from M, Puck, Belinda, Perda,
Cupid, Rosalind, and so on inwards. Um,
and the main rings labeled with the
Greek symbols there, uh, alpha, beta,
and so forth. Um, and then we have the
outer newly discovered rings in orange
and blue which have the Greek letters
new and mu on them. So these all orbit
round the equatorial plane as the rings
do. Um, and that's the obvious uh place
for uh reaccreted ring material to form
into these moons. They're prograde.
They're going the same way round as the
planet spins, which gives them a degree
of stability. But nevertheless, the
orbits are somewhat chaotic because they
are quite crowded together and their
mutual gravity constantly changes their
orbits with little tugs and pushes
between them and collisions are
therefore seen to be inevitable.
simulations give us a hint that there
will be collisions at some point in the
next few million years perhaps between
Desdona and Cresa or between Cupid and
Belinda or Perda and Juliet and uh that
these
will have their orbits cross each other
and if there is a collision then more
debris will be fed into the ring system
and ring systems like that tend to
reaccrete new moonlets and new moons in
fairly short order. Tens of thousands or
hundreds of thousands of years even is
all it needs for a ring system to start
growing more moons. So these inner moons
are perhaps transitory.
They're all interior to Miranda and you
can see they're in two groups mainly.
There's six in the Porsche group uh
there. Bianca, Cresa, Desdona, Juliet,
Porsche itself, and Rosalind. And then
we have the little outer group of three,
Belinda, Cupid, and Perda going around
in fairly similar orbits to each other.
And further out, Mab and Puck.
There are a couple that are really
associated with the rings. Cordelia and
Oilia. There are
shepherd moons orbiting inside and
outside one of the major rings there,
keeping the ring particles coralled into
orbit
for the alpha and beta rings. And Mab
seems to be right in the center of this
outermost mu ring and associated with
having uh been the source of a lot of
the material. So maybe that has been
struck by something fairly recently and
created uh the uh large blue ring that
we see there.
Uh now Puck orbiting slightly on its own
in the gap between them. We have an
image of Puck. It's 162 miles uh sorry
kilometers in diameter and that's the
largest of the inner moons and it's the
only one that Voyager 2 managed to grab
a picture of which is where this image
is from. So actually it's uh a little
bit smaller than the 470 of Miranda. Um
and well it's one of the inner moons but
it's kind of on its own. So an
interesting little world.
Now the outer moons that orbit beyond
the big five, the irregulars, they are
mostly small. So the smallest are at
around about 10 kilometers and the
largest ones up to about 200. And there
is a division between the groupings. We
have a prograde group that orbit the
same way round as the uh uh orbit and
the direction of uh rotation of um the
planet itself. And then we have the uh
retrograde ones. And you can see we've
actually put in on the map here on this
diagram some of the uh moons of the
other planets as well. So Jupiter,
Saturn, Uranus and Neptune shown with
the different symbols and you get that
same division with a gap between in the
central region
between prograde and retrograde there
where the inclination is in that middle
region you find nothing. And this is
interesting. It's due to the uh
perturbations of the sun's gravity. It
pushes the moons over into highly
eccentric orbits if they're in that
region. And it's uh called the KOI
instability. And it tends to mean that
we either end up with high or low
inclinations in the uh pro and
retrograde groupings. Um, and that uh
there aren't very many in that central
region because their orbits tend to end
up crossing those of the other asteroids
and sorry, the other moons and uh ending
up with collisions or being ejected from
the system completely in fairly short
time scales. And so with that, I will
leave you with this artist's impression
of the big five moons of Uranus. And I
hope you've enjoyed that one. Thanks
very much for listening.